IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

4861

ECO: Energy-Constrained Optimization
With Reinforcement Learning for
Humanoid Walking

Weidong Huang , Jingwen Zhang , Member, IEEE, Jiongye Li, Shibowen Zhang , Jiayang Wu,
Jiayi Wang , Member, IEEE, Hangxin Liu , Member, IEEE, Yaodong Yang , Member, IEEE,
and Yao Su , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Achieving stable and energy-eﬃcient

locomotion
is essential for humanoid robots to operate continuously in
real-world applications. Existing model predictive control (MPC)
learning (RL) approaches often rely on
and reinforcement
energy-related metrics embedded within a multi-objective opti-
mization framework, which require extensive hyperparameter
tuning and often result in suboptimal policies. To address these
challenges, we propose ECO (Energy-Constrained Optimization),
a constrained RL framework that separates energy-related met-
rics from rewards, reformulating them as explicit inequality
constraints. This method provides a clear and interpretable phys-
ical representation of energy costs, enabling more eﬃcient and
intuitive hyperparameter tuning for improved energy eﬃciency.
ECO introduces dedicated constraints for energy consumption
and reference motion, enforced by the Lagrangian method,
to achieve stable, symmetric, and energy-eﬃcient walking for
humanoid robots. We evaluated ECO against MPC, standard
RL with reward shaping, and four state-of-the-art constrained
RL methods. Experiments, including sim-to-sim and sim-to-real
transfers on the kid-sized humanoid robot BRUCE, demonstrate
that ECO signiﬁcantly reduces energy consumption compared to

Received 11 December 2024; revised 9 June 2025, 1 September 2025,
and 31 October 2025; accepted 5 February 2026. Date of publication
13 February 2026; date of current version 24 February 2026. This article
was recommended for publication by Associate Editor M. Gaggero and
Editor X. Liu upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was
supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62403064 and Grant 62403063 and in part by Shenzhen Science
and Technology Program under Grant ZDCY20250901094531003. (Weidong
Huang and Jingwen Zhang contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding
authors: Jingwen Zhang; Yao Su.)

Weidong Huang, Jingwen Zhang, Jiayi Wang, Hangxin Liu, and Yao Su
are with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing
Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI), Beijing 100080, China
(e-mail: bigeasthuang@gmail.com;
zhangjingwen@bigai.ai; wangjiayi@
bigai.ai; liuhx@bigai.ai; suyao@bigai.ai).

Jiongye Li is with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI), Beijing
100080, China, and also with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: lijiongye@bigai.ai).

Shibowen Zhang is with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI),
Beijing 100080, China, and also with the Department of Automation, Uni-
versity of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230022, China (e-mail:
zhangshibowen@bigai.ai).

Jiayang Wu is with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intel-
ligence, Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI), Beijing
100080, China, and also with the Department of Computer Science, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: wujiayang@bigai.ai).
Yaodong Yang is with the Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the School
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (e-mail:
yaodong.yang@pku.edu.cn).

This article has

supplementary downloadable material available at

https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2026.3662755, provided by the authors.

Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASE.2026.3662755

baselines while maintaining robust walking performance. These
results highlight a substantial advancement in energy-eﬃcient
humanoid locomotion. All experimental demonstrations can be
found on the project website: https://sites.google.com/view/eco-
humanoid.

Note to Practitioners—Traditional MPC and RL approaches
often require extensive hyperparameter tuning and frequently
result in suboptimal solutions for improving energy eﬃciency
while maintaining stable walking performance. ECO is designed
to address these challenges by reformulating energy consump-
tion as explicit inequality constraints, providing a physically
interpretable and intuitive approach to optimizing energy eﬃ-
ciency. This framework is particularly well-suited for applications
prioritizing energy conservation and operational stability, such
as surveillance, disaster response, and long-duration autonomous
operations. Additionally, ECO generates emergent behaviors such
as lighter steps and reduced body shaking, which are espe-
cially advantageous for loco-manipulation tasks by minimizing
disruptions to upper-body manipulation caused by locomotion.
Comparative experiments empirically oﬀer valuable insights into
constraint selection and learning setups, which may also inspire
relevant ongoing research in constrained RL.

Index Terms—Humanoid and bipedal locomotion, constrained

reinforcement learning, legged robots.

I. INTRODUCTION

R ECENT advances in humanoid robotics have enabled

these robots to perform complex motions, such as
walking, running, jumping, and even loco-manipulation [1],
[2], [3], [4]. Despite these achievements, energy eﬃciency
still remains a signiﬁcant bottleneck for humanoid robots.
Compared to their biological counterparts [5], humanoid
robots require substantially more energy to perform sim-
range, endurance,
limiting their operational
ilar
and maximum payload in real-world applications
[5],
[6].

tasks,

To improve the energy eﬃciency of humanoid robots, one
learning
promising approach is to leverage reinforcement
(RL) to optimize the control policy. For instance, Proxi-
mal Policy Optimization (PPO)-based frameworks incorporate
energy-related terms into reward functions, such as minimiz-
ing joint torques, joint accelerations, and contact forces [7],
[8], [9]. However, to achieve eﬃcient and stable locomo-
these methods often require extensive tuning on the
tion,
weights of the reward terms regarding energy cost,
task
completion, and stability. This tuning process is non-intuitive

1558-3783 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and
similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

and time-consuming, as (i) the eﬀects of weight conﬁgurations
are not straightforward, (ii) the training periods—ranging from
hours to days—to evaluate a single coeﬃcient choice even
with parallel computation [10], [11]. Furthermore, conﬂicting
objectives within the reward terms can result in suboptimal
solutions or even convergence failures [12], [13]. For example,
the learned policy might prioritize minimizing energy con-
sumption at the cost of stability, resulting in unstable walking,
or emphasize stability at the expense of signiﬁcantly increased
energy usage.

To simplify the reward tuning process for optimizing
energetically eﬃcient
locomotion with RL, we propose
ECO (Energy-Constrained Optimization). ECO leverages con-
strained RL formualtion to separate conﬂicting objectives into
distinct rewards and constraints [1], [14], [15]. This separation
ensures that critical constraints, such as energy consumption
limits, are strictly enforced, while task-related rewards, such
as velocity tracking and stability can be optimized without
extensive tuning of coeﬃcients. Energy constraint thresholds
are identiﬁed through a physically intuitive tuning process,
incrementally adjusted based on direct energy criteria using
a linear search algorithm. We evaluate our approach by
comparing four state-of-the-art constrained RL methods and
investigating various constraint settings. Our results empir-
ically show that
the proposed setup outperforms others
in training stability and constraint enforcement. Through
extensive experiments on both simulation and hardware
platforms, we validate that ECO consistently converges to
solutions that minimize energy consumption while ensuring
stable and robust walking.

Our main

contributions

can

be

summarized

as

follows:

1) We propose ECO, a method designed for optimizing
the energy eﬃciency of humanoid locomotion. Rather
than balancing energy minimization with other reward
terms—such as velocity tracking, motion tracking, and
stability—we explicitly treat energy cost as a con-
straint. This approach provides a clear,
interpretable
physical meaning of the energy cost, enabling eﬃcient
and intuitive hyperparameter tuning focused on energy
eﬃciency.

2) We investigate four constrained RL algorithms and also
diﬀerent constraint settings to train the policy. Through
the
extensive simulations, we empirically ﬁnd that
PPO-Lagrangian method with the current constraint
setup achieves the lowest energy cost with fast and
stable convergence. Additionally, instead of manually
designing eﬃcient walking, we observe that the resulting
policy promotes i) extended knee movements, ii) lighter
steps, and iii) reduced body shaking as shown in Fig. 1.
3) We carry out real-world validations on the Bruce robot.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to
achieve energy-eﬃcient humanoid walking using con-
strained RL on a real humanoid robot. Compared to
MPC and PPO baselines, ECO demonstrates approxi-
mately 6 times lower energy consumption than MPC
and 2.3 times lower than PPO, setting a new benchmark
for energy-eﬃcient humanoid locomotion.

Fig. 1. Comparison between the proposed constrained RL framework,
ECO, with MPC and normal RL (PPO) baselines. It creates synergy
between energy consumption and walking stability of the humanoid robots
without requiring an extensive parameter-turning process, outperforming both
MPC and normal RL baselines.

We organize the remainder of the paper as follows. Sec. II
reviews the literature related to this work. Sec. III introduces
the preliminaries of RL and constrinted RL formulations.
Sec. IV presents the proposed ECO framework in detail. Secs.
V and VI show the simulation and experiment result of ECO
on BRUCE with comprehensive evaluations and compares
with baseline methods. Finally, we discuss and conclude the
paper in Secs. VII and VIII.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Energy Optimization in Legged Locomotion

Improving energy eﬃciency directly helps to extend the
endurance of legged robots and prevent actuator overheating,
thereby improving the overall performance [6]. For example,
passive dynamic walkers can achieve eﬃcient and stable
walking through mechanical designs without any actuation
[16] or with minimal actuation [17]. However, achieving
similar eﬃciency in more complex legged systems, such as
quadrupedal and bipedal robots, remains a challenge. As a
uniﬁed Trajectory Optimization (TO) framework has been
widely used for legged locomotion [18], [19], incorporating
energy-related constraints tends to be a potential solution.
Reference [20] formulates the TO problem with the cost of
transport (CoT) as a constraint, which quantiﬁes the energy
expenditure per unit distance. However, using TO to consider
complex constraints often results in a high-dimensional and
nonconvex landscape, which hinders real-time usage. To sim-
plify the problem, energy constraints are approximated using
the norm of joint torques and accelerations [2], [21], [22], or
by encouraging speciﬁc bioinspired eﬃcient behaviors, such
as adaptive center of mass (CoM) height control and rolling
contact of the stance leg in gait design [23]. In these methods,
energy consumption is only implicitly considered, which often
makes it compromised in favor of other task requirements,
such as stability and robustness.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4863

B. Learning for Legged Locomotion

Given the aforementioned issues, oﬄine learning a locomo-
tion policy with complex rewards can be a promising solution
to balance energy-eﬃciency and robustness in real-time [24],
[25], [26]. Reference [27] demonstrated sim-to-real learning of
multiple bipedal gaits through periodic reward composition.
Similarly, [28] extended rapid motor adaptation (RMA) for
bipedal locomotion to address challenges such as payloads and
slippery surfaces. Other methods also integrated model-based
footstep planning with model-free RL to achieve dynamic
and eﬃcient walking [29], [30]. However, to avoid disrupting
the primary learning goals, energy penalties in the reward
function often act as regularizers, with minimal impact on
reducing excessive joint torque usage. Reference [31] balanced
energy consumption with stability through curriculum learning
with symmetric mirror loss. Reference [32] further studied
diﬀerent ways to incorporate symmertry, highlighting how
symmetry priors can improve gait robustness and sample eﬃ-
ciency without overly restricting policy exploration. Reference
[7] explored eﬃcient quadrupedal gaits with energy-centric
rewards. References [33], [34], [35], [36] train control poli-
cies for humanoid locomotion using human motion data as
reference trajectories. Despite these advancements, the energy-
related hyperparameters, like the reward weight or curriculum
length, still present an unclear physical meaning, which intri-
cates the weight tuning and curriculum design.

region of humanoid robots compared to quadrupeds, rethinking
how to select and design constraints and how to select an
appropriate optimization method within the constrained RL
framework to generate eﬃcient and stable walking perfor-
mance of humanoid robots remains a critical challenge.

III. PRELIMINARIES & PROBLEM STATEMENT

A. Markov Decision Processes

RL is typically modeled as a Markov Decision Process

(MDP) [37]:

M = (S, A, P, R, µ, γ),

(1)

where S and A denote the state and action spaces, respectively.
The functions P(sss(cid:48)|sss, aaa) and R(sss(cid:48)|sss, aaa) represents the transition
probability and corresponding reward of moving from state sss
to sss(cid:48) under action aaa. µµµ(·) represents the initial state distribution,
and γ is the discount factor.

A stationary policy πθθθ governs the action probability πθθθ(aaa|sss)
for a given state sss, with all policies parameterized by θθθ. The
corresponding inﬁnite-horizon reward is deﬁned as

JR(πθθθ) = Eπ

sss∼µµµ

#

γtR(ssst+1|ssst, aaat)

.

" ∞
X

t=0

The objective of the MDP is to maximize:

JR(πθθθ),

max
πθθθ∈Πθθθ

(2)

(3)

C. Constrained Reinforcement Learning

where Πθθθ is the neural network parameter space.

Constrained RL, or safe RL, formulates the problem as
a constrained Markov decision process (CMDP) [37], [38],
[39], [40], using cost functions to decouple rewards from
constraints. This allows robots to maximize rewards while
keeping costs within physically meaningful thresholds. CPO
[14] uses second-order optimization to enforce constraints
iteratively but struggles with scalability in multi-constraint
settings. PPO-Lagrangian (PPO-Lag) [41] enhances PPO with
primal-dual updates for better constraint satisfaction and per-
formance. Constraint manifold is deﬁned for safe exploration
leading to actions that satisfy corresponding constraints in [42]
and [43]. However, eﬃcient constraint manifold computation
for legged robots with a ﬂoating base remains challenging.
Constraint-rectiﬁed Policy Optimization (CRPO) [44] oﬀers
a primal-based framework well-suited for multi-constraint
problems, while Interior-point Policy Optimization (IPO)
[45] employs log-barrier penalties for feasibility enforcement.
Reference [15] extended IPO with a teacher-student frame-
work, transferring most reward terms into constraints to avoid
reward scale tuning, and demonstrated robust performance
on legged robots. Penalized Proximal Policy Optimization
(P3O) [46] uses clamping penalty functions for constraint
enforcement and has shown success in reducing viola-
tions (e.g., self-collision,
joint speed limits) in quadruped
locomotion [47]. Despite these advancements, these methods
have only been validated on quadruped robots. Applying
them to humanoid robots, especially when combining energy
consumption with other constraints (e.g., self-collision), can
overly restrict the search space. Given the smaller convergence

B. Constrained Markov Decision Processes

A CMDP extends the standard MDP framework by incor-
porating a set of cost functions, referred to as general
constraints. This set is deﬁned as C = (Ci, bi)m
i=1, where
: S × A → R is associated with a
each cost function Ci
corresponding threshold bi.

The objective of the CMDP is to identify the policy that
maximizes the reward while satisfying all speciﬁed constraints:

JR(πθθθ),

max
πθθθ∈ΠC

(4)

where ΠC = Πθθθ ∩ ˚πθθθ | JCi(πθθθ) ≤ bi, ∀i = 1, . . . , m(cid:9) represents
the set of feasible policies that satisfy all constraints and
JCi(πθθθ) is the expected value of a cost function under a
policy π. These constraints can take various forms, such as
a discounted cumulative sum, average sum, etc. [37].

Discounted sum constraints are formulated to ensure that
a speciﬁed quantity remains below a given threshold over
the long term, accounting for cumulative eﬀects rather than
instantaneous values at each time step. They are deﬁned as:

JCi(πθθθ) = E

" T

X

#
γtCi(ssst+1|ssst, aaat)

≤ bi,

(5)

t=0

where T is the episode length. This type of constraint is par-
ticularly well-suited for maintaining long-term requirements in
robotic operations, such as limiting energy consumption over
a certain period.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

Average sum constraints ensure that the mean value of a
speciﬁc variable remains below a given threshold at each time
step. Formally, these constraints are expressed as:

JCi(πθθθ) = E

"

1
T

T
X

t=0

#

Ci(ssst+1|ssst, aaat)

≤ bi.

(6)

For instance,
speciﬁc motion styles, such as symmetry during walking.

these constraints can be utilized to enforce

C. Constraints RL Methods

1) PPO-Lag: PPO-Lag [41] is one of the most widely used

methods in constrained RL. The Lagrangian function is:

L(θθθ, λ1, . . ., λi) = JR(πθθθ) −

m
X

i=1

(cid:0)JCi(πθθθ) − bi

(cid:1) ,

λi

(7)

where λi is the Lagrange multipliers. Using this approach,
the original constrained optimization problem in Eq. (4) is
reformulated as an unconstrained optimization problem:

In this paper, we compare these methods and ultimately
select PPO-Lag as the constrained optimization approach for
ECO. In Sec. IV, we will provide detailed implementation
insights and explain the rationale behind this choice. In Sec. V,
we will compare their performance to validate this selection.

IV. PROPOSED ECO FRAMEWORK

In this section, we describe the proposed ECO framework,
which aims to minimize energy consumption in humanoid
locomotion while ensuring stable and natural leg movements.
Both the control policy and reward critic are implemented as
fully connected neural networks. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the
control policy takes the robot’s proprioception and velocity
commands as input and outputs the desired joint positions.
We train the policy using PPO-Lagrangian [48] in IsaacGym
and deploy it directly on the physical robot. The following
subsections introduce the state space, action space, constraints
settings, reward settings, and the formulation for constraint
policy optimization.

max
πθθθ∈Πθθθ

min
λ1,...,λi≥0

L(θθθ, λ1, . . ., λm).

(8)

A. State Space

This optimization process alternates between updating the
primal variable πθθθ and the dual variables λi, ultimately yielding
an approximate solution to the Eq. (4).

2) CRPO: CRPO [44] alternates between maximizing the
reward and minimizing the cost, prioritizing the reduction of
costs when constraints are violated. In cases where multi-
ple constraints are violated, a single constraint is randomly
selected for optimization:

LCRPO = 1nk=0 · JR(πθθθ) −

nkX

i=1

νi · JCi(πθθθ),

(9)

where nk = Pm
1JCi >bi is the number of violated constraints,
ννν ∈ Rnk is a random one-hot vector used to select a violated
constraint to update at each iteration.

i

3) IPO: IPO [45] transforms the constrained RL problem
into an unconstrained one by employing a logarithmic barrier
function, deﬁned as follows:
m
X

κIPO
i

· log (cid:0)JCi(πθθθ) − bi

(cid:1) ,

LIPO = JR(πθθθ) −

(10)

i=1

where κIPO
steepness of the logarithmic function.

i

> 0 is the ﬁxed hyperparameter that controls the

4) P3O: P3O [46] extends the PPO framework by incor-
porating penalties for constraint violations into the objective
function. The objective is deﬁned as:

LP3O = JR(πθθθ) −

m
X

i=1

κP3O
i

· max{JCi (πθθθ) + (cid:15)i, 0},

(11)

where κP3O

i

represents the ﬁxed weight for each constrain.

(cid:15)i = E(sss,aaa)∼buﬀer

" T

X

#
γtCi(ssst+1|ssst, aaat)

− bi,

(12)

t=0

represents the amount by which the actual cost exceeds the
constraint threshold bi, as calculated using data collected from
prior interactions with the environment.

The input to the policy network consists of an observation
history comprising K f consecutive frames, which include the
robot’s proprioceptive states and velocity commands, with a
dimensionality of S. Speciﬁcally, S includes velocity com-
yaw ) ∈ R3, clock inputs (sin(t), cos(t)) ∈
mands (vcmd
R2, joint positions qqq ∈ Rn, joint velocities ˙qqq ∈ Rn, body
angular velocities ωωωang ∈ R3, last action aaat−1 ∈ Rn, and the
XY components of body Euler angles ωωωang ∈ R2, where n is
number of leg Degree of Freedoms (DoFs). The body yaw
angle is excluded due to its drift on the real hardware.

, vcmd
y

, ωcmd

x

The state space of our reward critic includes both the inputs
used by the policy network and additional privileged informa-
tion, such as body linear velocity, body yaw angle, external
push forces and torques, friction coeﬃcients, body mass, phase
identiﬁers, and contact indicators. These indicators specify the
swing and stance phases of each foot, as determined by the
contact scheduler.

B. Action Space

In this work, we actively control leg joints while the arm
joints are ﬁxed to nominal angles. The action from the policy,
represented as aaa ∈ Rn, is deﬁned as the deviations from the
nominal joint positions qqqnominal [29], [49]. This action is fed
into the PD controller to convert the action into the desired
torque command using the following equation:

ˆτττ = Kp(aaa + qqqnominal − qqq) + Kd(0 − ˙qqq),

(13)

where qqq, ˙qqq denote the current joint position and joint velocity.

C. Constraints

1) Constraints Selection Consideration: Since minimizing
energy consumption is the main focus of this paper, a naive
choice is to mix it with other objectives, such as adherence to
task commands, behavior stability, and disturbance rejection.
However, regarding energy consumption, we observed that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4865

Fig. 2. Overview of the training and deployment process in proposed ECO framework. The policy network, taking velocity commands and proprioception
data as inputs, outputs desired joint positions at 100Hz to a PD controller, which updates torque commands at 1kHz. The reward critic is trained with privileged
observations. The simulator provides the reward, energy cost, and symmetry cost, which are used to compute the reward and cost returns. The policy is then
updated using the Lagrangian formulation in Eq. (21) to balance rewards and costs. The trained policy is directly deployed to the real world.

adjusting the reward weights alone for PPO does not lead to
convergence within the feasible domain (shown in Sec. V-D1).
Consequently, we select energy consumption as a constraint in
this optimization process. Additionally, we integrate reference
motion (using Mirror Loss as the reference in this paper) as a
constraint to encourage natural motions.

Among prior works [15], [47], additional reward terms are
often placed within constraints for quadrupedal robots. In
Sec. V-D6, we investigate various constraint settings including
the constraints used in [15] and [47], and ﬁnd that the current
approach struggles with stable convergence as the number of
constraints increases. This may be due to humanoid robots
having a much smaller constrained feasible domain than
quadrupeds, which makes convergence more challenging in
the presence of multiple constraints. Therefore, in this work,
we focus on two primary constraints: energy minimization and
reference motion tracking for humanoid robots.

2) Energy Constraint: Due to the challenges in accurately
measuring link inertia and quantifying friction and heat dissi-
pation losses, the overall energy consumption of a robot cannot
be directly measured. Therefore, in this work, the motor energy
consumption, which constitutes the primary part of the total
energy consumption, is selected as the evaluation metric. It
can be calculated by integrating the absolute power of the n
motors. Since the timestep dt is ﬁxed, the energy cost function
is deﬁned as

where b1 is the energy threshold, estimated based on the
robot’s speed range and walking duration.

3) Reference Motion Constraint: To enforce stability and
mirror symmetry, we deﬁne a mirror loss term following [31]
as the cost function:

C2(sss(cid:48)|sss, aaa) = ||sg (πθθθ(sssi)) − Ψa(πθθθ(Ψo(sssi)))||2,

(16)

where sg (·) is the stop gradient operator, Ψa(·) and Ψo(·) are
the mirroring functions for actions and states, respectively, and
πθθθ(sssi) is the mean action of the stochastic policy conditioned
on the state sssi. This constraint ensures that when the observa-
tion input to the policy is mirrored, the corresponding action
output is also mirrored. Practically, if the policy learns to lift
the left leg at the appropriate moment, this constraint also
enforces it to lift the right leg at the corresponding moment,
and vice versa. This reference constraint promotes more stable
and symmetric behavior within the policy. Such symmetry
fosters balanced behavior without the need to prescribe motion
trajectories explicitly, thereby reducing the necessity to deﬁne
trajectory parameters manually.

We apply the average constraint from Eq. (6) to this cost

function:

JC2 (πθθθ) = E

"

1
T

T
X

t=0

||πθθθ(ssst) − Ψa(πθθθ(Ψo(ssst)))||2

≤ b2,

(17)

#

C1(ssst+1|ssst, aaat) =

n
X

j=1

|τττ j
t ˙qqq j
t |

(14)

where b2 is the constraint threshold of reference motion.

to exclude dt. Here, τττ j
t denote the torque and velocity
of the j-th joint at time t. Using the discounted sum constraint
from Eq. (5), the energy constraint is formulated as:

t and ˙qqq j

JC1 (πθθθ) = E

2

4

T
X

n
X

γt

3
|τττ j
t ˙qqq j
5 ≤ b1,
t |

(15)

t=0

j=1

D. Rewards

The aspect of reward design is not the main focus of this
paper, therefore we adopt a reward conﬁguration similar to
the Humanoid-Gym [9]. Since reference motion and energy
constraints are directly integrated into the cost function, we
have omitted the reference joint position tracking reward, joint

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4866

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

velocity penalty reward, and joint torque penalty reward from
the original setup. The total reward function is deﬁned as
R(ssst+1|ssst, aaat) = X

µi · ri,

(18)

where the rewards ri and their corresponding scales µi will be
detailed in Sec. V.

i

E. Constrained Policy Optimization

To solve the constrained optimization for energy-eﬃcient
humanoid walking, we employ the Lagrangian method to
transform the original constrained objective into an uncon-
strained form, as introduced in Sec. III. Having two designed
constraints, we formulate the problem as follows:

max
πθθθ∈Πθθθ

min
λ1,λ2≥0

JR(πθθθ) −

2
X

i=1

(cid:0)JCi(πθθθ) − bi

(cid:1).

λi

(19)

Here, JC1 (πθθθ) and JC2(πθθθ) are cost returns deﬁned by Eqs. (15)
and (17). Solving Eq. (19) involves iteratively updating the
policy parameters and the Lagrange multipliers. The update
steps alternate between improving the policy based on both
reward and cost gradients, and adjusting λi to enforce con-
straints. Formally:

πθθθk+1 = πθθθk + α(k)

"
∇θθθk JR(πθθθk ) −

2
X

#
i ∇θθθk JCi(πθθθk )
λk

,

i=1

(20)

(cid:1)(cid:9) .

λk+1
i

= max ˚0, λk

i − βi(k) (cid:0)JCi(πθθθk ) − bi
Here, α(k) and βi(k) are learning rates computed by Adam
the training iteration k. The projection
optimizer [50] at
max{0, x} ensures that each Lagrange multiplier remains non-
negative. We integrate this Lagrangian approach into the PPO
algorithm [51] within an Actor-Critic framework. The policy
is optimized to maximize a combined objective:

LPPO-Lag = LR − rt(θθθ)

2
X

i=1

λiJCi(πθθθ),

(21)

where LR is the clipped surrogate objective deﬁned by PPO:

LR = min{rt (θθθ) Aπold (sss≤t, aaat),

clip (rt (θθθ) , c1, c2) Aπold(sss≤t, aaat)},

with the probability ratio

rt(θθθ) = πθθθ(aaat | sss≤t)
πold(aaat | sss≤t)

.

(22)

(23)

In this formulation, πold denotes the behavior policy used for
data collection, Aπold is the advantage computed via GAE [52],
and c1, c2 deﬁne the PPO clipping range.

Similarly, within the PPO framework, the ﬁnal objectives

of IPO, P3O, and CRPO are as follows:

LIPO = LR − rt (θθθ) ·

LP3O = LR − rt (θθθ) ·

2
X

i=1
2
X

i=1

κIPO
i

· log (cid:0)JCi(πθθθ) − bi

(cid:1) ,

κP3O
i

· max ˚JCi(πθθθ) + (cid:15)i, 0(cid:9) ,

(24)

LCRPO = 1nk=0 · LR − rt (θθθ) ·

2
X

i

νi · JCi(πθθθ).

=
Among the algorithms compared, P3O (with ﬁxed κP3O
1.0) and PPO-Lag (with initial λi = 0, βi = 1e−3)
required minimal parameter tuning and achieved low con-
straint violations. While P3O demonstrated comparable energy
performance, PPO-Lag exhibited better convergence speed and
stability, thereby selected for implementing the constrained
policy optimization approach in ECO.

i

The reward critic is trained with the following loss [53]:
LRewardCritic = max {(cid:107)V(ssst) − Rt(cid:107)2,
(cid:107)Vtarget(ssst) + clip(Vtarget(ssst) − V(ssst), c1, c2) − Rt(cid:107)2

(cid:9) ,

(25)

is the cumulative return at time t, V(ssst) denotes
where Rt
the value estimated by the critic at state ssst, and Vtarget(ssst) is
the value approximated by the target critic at state ssst. Unlike
previous studies [41], [48] that utilize a cost critic, we estimate
cost return for energy using the Monte Carlo approach [54],
which achieves comparable performance while requiring fewer
network parameters and minimal design choices.

A. Robot Platform

V. SIMULATION

We use the kid-sized humanoid robot BRUCE [3], [55],
[56] as an example to demonstrate the performance of the
proposed ECO framework. BRUCE is 70cm tall, weighs 4.8kg,
and has a total of 16 DoFs, with 3 per arm and 5 per
leg. All leg DoFs are driven by liquid-cooled proprioceptive
actuators with peak torque 10.5Nm, while the arm DoFs
are driven by Dynamixel servo motors. The PD controller
gains for both legs are set as Kp = diag(7, 10, 7, 10, 1.5) and
Kd = diag(0.2, 0.4, 0.2, 0.4, 0.08) for the hip yaw, hip pitch,
hip roll, knee pitch, and ankle pitch joints, respectively.

B. Learning Setups

1) Traning Setups: The policy training is conducted in
the IsaacGym [57] with parallelization across 8192 environ-
ments. The utilized rewards and scales are summarized in
Tab. I. The constraint policy optimization of ECO utilizes the
PPO-Lagrangian [41] and the hyperparameters are shown in
Tab. III. We employ domain randomization [58] to enhance
transfer to unseen scenarios, with speciﬁc parameters listed in
Tab. II. During training, two types of external perturbations are
applied to enhance the policy robustness: force disturbances
every 2s, lasting 0.001s with magnitudes randomly sampled
between [−100, 100]N, and velocity impulses every 4s, also
lasting 0.001s, with linear velocities up to 0.2m/s and angular
velocities up to 0.4rad/s. The simulation is executed at a
frequency of 1kHz, with a control frequency of 100Hz. The
training process is carried out on a system equipped with an
Intel Core i9-13900KFN processor and NVIDIA GeForce RTX
4090, and each training run consists of 2000 policy iterations.
Convergence is typically achieved within approximately 4h
of wall-clock time. We use the policy trained after 10h for
sim-to-real experiments.

2) Constraint Thresholds Search: Since the PPO baseline
policy described in Sec. V-C converges to a suboptimal
solution, it serves as a useful initial reference for selecting
thresholds. For the reference motion constraint,
constraint

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4867

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF ADDITIONAL REWARD FUNCTIONS. THE TRACKING ERROR METRIC IS DEFINED AS:φ(e, W) := exp(−w·(cid:107)e(cid:107)2),WHERE e REPRESENTS THE
TRACKING ERROR, AND w IS THE ASSOCIATED WEIGHT. ∆vLIN AND ∆ωANG REPRESENT THE LINEAR AND ANGULAR VELOCITY ERRORS; 1(·) IS
THE INDICATOR FUNCTION FOR THE LOGICAL CONDITION (·), FOR EXAMPLE, 1STAND PHASE = 1 WHEN THE LEG IS IN STAND PHASE. tair IS
THE DURATION THAT THE FOOT REMAINS IN THE AIR DURING LOCOMOTION; ˙P f IS THE VELOCITY OF THE FEET; qYAW/ROLL IS THE

YAW AND ROLL JOINT POSITION; q0 IS THE DEFAULT JOINT POSITION; Pb

z IS THE BASE HEIGHT; ∆h f IS THE DEVIATION

IN FOOT HEIGHT; ht IS THE TARGET FOOT HEIGHT DURING THE SWING PHASE; P REPRESENTS THE SUMMATION
ACROSS ALL LEGS. THE BASE HEIGHT TARGET IS SET TO 0.45m, THE MAXIMUM CONTACT FORCE Fmax IS
SET TO 50N, AND THE TARGET FOOT HEIGHT ht IS 0.03m

TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF DOMAIN RANDOMIZATION. THE DOMAIN RANDOM-
IZATION TERMS AND THE ASSOCIATED PARAMETER RANGES ARE
LISTED. ADDITIVE RANDOMIZATION INCREMENTS THE PARAM-
ETER BY A VALUE WITHIN THE SPECIFIED RANGE WHILE
SCALING RANDOMIZATION ADJUSTS IT BY A MULTIPLICA-
TIVE FACTOR FROM THE SAME RANGE

TABLE III

HYPERPARAMETERS IN THE TRAINING PROCESS

we empirically observed that the mirror-symmetry loss value
obtained from the PPO baseline ensures robust and symmetric
walking behavior. Accordingly, we set the threshold b2 in
Eq. (17) as 0.05 across all experiments. For the energy
constraint threshold, we adopt a linear search strategy [15]
to determine appropriate values, further details are provided
in Sec. V-D4. Each threshold search takes around 4 hours of
wall-clock time depending on the chosen step size. Addition-
ally, as summarized in Tab. III, energy consumption thresholds
may vary with diﬀerent target velocities.

C. Baselines

For comparison, ﬁve baseline approaches are chosen to
demonstrate that our proposed ECO framework signiﬁcantly
eﬃciency without
the
improves

degenerating

energy

performance of humanoid robots in walking tasks. The MPC
baseline uses the state-of-the-art model-based hierarchical
method which combines a high-level MPC planner with
a simpliﬁed model and a low-level whole-body controller
with the full-body dynamics [19]. Humanoid-Gym [9] is
used as the model-free RL baseline (PPO) for training
end-to-end locomotion policies in humanoid robots. To
facilitate a rigorous comparison with the ECO model, the
PPO baseline has been augmented with an energy penalty
reward [7], which serves as the constraint within the ECO
framework. We selected scales of energy penalty reward
{−0.001, −0.01, −0.1, −0.03, −0.05, −0.08, −0.015,
µe
−0.02, −0.025}, while all other rewards and scales are aligned
with those of ECO as detailed in Tab. I. Additionally, a
mirror loss is included in the PPO loss function to encourage
symmetry, with a ﬁxed weight of 0.1. Three constrained RL
baseline methods are chosen as introduce in Eq. (27). For

∈

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4868

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 3. Comparison of training metrics for ECO, P3O, IPO, and CRPO. The energy consumption and mirror reference motion thresholds are set at 60J
and 0.05, respectively, as indicated by the black dashed lines in (a) and (b). Results averaged over 10 random seeds.

IPO and P3O, we ﬁne-tune the hyperparameters as follows:
κP3O
1

∈ {1.0, 10.0}, and κIPO

= 1.0, κP3O

= 1.0, κIPO

= 1.0.

2

2

1

D. Simulation Results

1) Comparing Constraint RL Algorithms: We compare the
proposed ECO framework against PPO, IPO, P3O, and CRPO
under a 0.1m/s linear velocity tracking task, subject to energy
and reference motion constraints. To assess the performance,
we evaluate four key metrics, each capturing a distinct aspect
of the task: (1) Normalized total reward ˆJR — reﬂects over-
all task performance; (2) Normalized episode length Tep —
ˆJC1
measures stability and robustness; (3) Mean energy cost
— quantiﬁes energy eﬃciency; (4) Mean mirror cost
ˆJC2 —
evaluates motion symmetry. The metrics are formally deﬁned
as:

1
E

1
E

ˆJR =

Tep =

ˆJC1 = 1
E

ˆJC2 = 1
B

t=0 rt,i − Rmin

PE

PT

PE

i=1
Rmax − Rmin
i=1 T i
ep − T max
ep
ep − T min
T max
ep
T
E
X
X

,

C1(sssi

t, aaai
t),

t=0

C2(sssi, aaai),

i=1
B
X

i=1

,

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

where rt,i is the reward at time t of episode i, and Rmin, Rmax
are the minimum and maximum cumulative rewards observed
across all algorithms, T i
ep is the length of episode i, and T min
ep ,
T max
are the minimum and maximum episode lengths among
ep
all methods, (sssi, aaai) is the i-th state–action sample in a batch
and B is the batch size. We enforce the average-sum constraint

over each gradient batch as in [59], using the same batch size
across all algorithms.

As shown in Fig. 3, ECO (initialized with λi = 0, βi = 10−3)
consistently converges to the target energy threshold of 60J
while maintaining a normalized episode length close to 1.0,
demonstrating both energy eﬃciency and training stability.
In comparison, P3O satisﬁes both the energy and reference
motion constraints but requires more iterations to converge.
IPO exhibits sensitivity to the penalty coeﬃcient κIPO
: with
= 1.0, it fails to satisfy the energy constraint; increasing
κIPO
1
= 10.0 enforces the constraint but leads to reduced
it to κIPO
episode length due to overly conservative behavior. CRPO,
while capable of satisfying the constraints, exhibits unstable
convergence,
likely due to frequent policy shifts between
optimizing for reward and constraint cost.

1

1

As shown in Fig. 4, we explore three orders of magnitude
for the energy reward coeﬃcient in PPO (µe), but none yields
a satisfactory balance between energy eﬃciency and stability.
Lower coeﬃcients failed to reduce energy consumption, while
higher ones caused instability and frequent falls. These results
highlight the diﬃculty of manually tuning reward weights in
multi-objective PPO. In contrast, ECO directly enforces energy
and motion constraints, avoiding such tuning and achieving
robust, energy-eﬃcient behavior.

Regarding the reference motion constraint (Fig. 3(b)), IPO,
P3O, and CRPO rapidly converge to the predeﬁned threshold
of 0.05, though their resulting behaviors are more conservative
than those of ECO. In contrast, PPO with various energy coef-
ﬁcients converges to diﬀerent levels of mirror cost (Fig. 4(b)),
often yielding asymmetric and unstable gaits. These results
highlight that constrained RL oﬀers a more principled and
eﬃcient framework for aligning policy behaviors with target
objectives without heavy hyperparameter tuning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4869

Fig. 4. Comparison of training metrics for ECO and the PPO. The energy consumption and mirror reference motion thresholds are set at 60J and 0.05,
respectively, as indicated by the black dashed lines in (a) and (b). Results averaged over 10 random seeds.

Fig. 5. Sim-to-Sim transfer results. For visual clarity, single-run deployment curves are shown. (a) Visual comparison of walking stability across simulators;
(b) Ankle height consistency across simulators; (c) Motor energy consumption at 0.1m/s over 10s in Gazebo; (d) Body velocity tracking in MuJoCo in
diﬀerent speed commands.

Finally, we note that PPO, P3O, and IPO rely on ﬁxed
constraint coeﬃcients (µe, κP3O, κIPO), and CRPO lacks
constraint-speciﬁc parameters altogether. These approaches
are therefore prone to convergence issues or require care-
ful manual tuning. In contrast, ECO leverages PPO-Lag to
dynamically update the Lagrange multipliers λi using the
Adam optimizer, allowing adaptive scaling the impact of
constrains during training. This dynamic adjustment signiﬁ-
cantly improves convergence stability and highlights PPO-Lag
as a more eﬀective strategy for optimizing energy-eﬃcient
humanoid locomotion.

2) Sim-to-Sim Transfer: To evaluate the robustness and
generalizability of the learned policy, we transferred it to two
additional simulation environments, MuJoCo [60] and Gazebo
[61], to assess ECO’s sim-to-sim performance and benchmark
it against baseline methods. As shown in Fig. 5(a), our method
achieves stable walking across three simulation environments.
Fig. 5(b) and (c) demonstrate that ECO consistently maintains
a similar gait pattern during cross-simulator transfer and
reduces energy usage in Gazebo while BRUCE walks at
0.1m/s over a 10s period. Fig. 5(d) further shows that our
method accurately tracks linear velocity commands at three

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

VELOCITY TRACKING AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION ACROSS SIMULATORS. AGGREGATED OVER 10 RUNS, EACH LASTING 10 SECONDS

TABLE IV

Fig. 7. Energy constraint threshold analysis. (a)(b): The mean energy
cost and normalized episode length for diﬀerent energy thresholds. Results
averaged over 10 random seeds.

Benchmark of disturbance

rejection. BRUCE was
sub-
Fig. 6.
from 8 diﬀerent directions
jected to pushes of varying durations
(0◦, 45◦, 90◦, 135◦, 180◦, 225◦, 270◦, 315◦). Results are averaged over 10 runs.

diﬀerent target speeds (0.1m/s, 0.15m/s, 0.2m/s) in MuJoCo.
We report summary statistics over 10 runs in Tab. IV. Results
show that MPC incurs the highest energy cost and fails to
track higher target speeds (e.g., 0.2m/s), likely due to its QP
solver being unable to resolve contact dynamics in ﬁnite time.
PPO exhibits better performance than MPC but with moderate
energy consumption. ECO,
in contrast, not only achieves
accurate velocity tracking but also maintains signiﬁcantly
lower energy consumption—approximately 3 times lower than
MPC and 1.4 times lower than PPO.

3) Disturbance Rejection Test: To verify that the walking
robustness has not been sacriﬁced in the learned policy, we
conduct disturbance rejection tests on BRUCE while walking
in Gazebo. External forces are applied at the origin of the
coordinate frame attached to BRUCE’s body link. The timing
is chosen as vulnerable transitions from a double-stance phase
to lifting the left foot or the right foot. Since the response
to perturbations varies with the direction in these two cases,
we record the maximum force BRUCE could resist for both

timings and use the smaller of the two values for analysis.
As shown in Fig. 6, the proposed ECO framework demon-
strates greater robustness across all directions, especially in the
sagittal direction, compared to the baseline MPC, and shows
comparable robustness to PPO. Although ECO has not encoun-
tered pushes with a duration longer than 0.001s in the training
stage, ECO still performs well under longer pushes, indicating
that our method has not overﬁtted to improve energy eﬃciency
in compromise of robustness. Besides controlled pushes, two
qualitative disturbance experiments in Mujoco are conducted
to evaluate robustness under more diverse and unpredictable
scenarios: (1) diﬀerent links of BRUCE are manually dragged
at random timings with random magnitudes, producing varied
disturbance directions and intensities; (2) Balls are thrown
to BRUCE with random velocities to create diﬀerent impul-
sive contacts. As shown in the accompanying video, ECO
successfully maintains stable walking and recovers from these
random perturbations, further demonstrating that the learned
policy generalizes beyond the speciﬁc disturbance patterns
used in training.

4) Energy Constraint Threshold Analysis: We observe that
the baseline method PPO converges (achieving a normalized
episode length of 0.9) within 1500 training iterations while

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4871

ALGORITHM PERFORMANCE COMPARISON IN THE REAL WORLD.
AGGREGATED OVER 10 RUNS, EACH LASTING 10 SECONDS

TABLE V

6) More Constraints Setting:

feasible region. Finally, Fig. 8(c) illustrates that our method
achieves stable convergence across the range of learning rates.
In previous work on
quadruped robots [15], [47], additional reward terms such as
self-collision, foot contact velocity, and foot clearance were
integrated into the constraints to reduce the need for extensive
reward scaling. We also attempted to incorporate these three
constraints. Speciﬁcally, we trained an additional multi-head
cost critic to estimate the cost returns for self-collision, foot
contact velocity, and foot clearance. For these additional
constraints, we used the converged reward values obtained
from ECO (with two constraints) as the constraint thresholds.
We analyze the performance of several algorithms under ﬁve
constraints and investigate how the convergence properties of
ECO are aﬀected by diﬀerent constraint conﬁgurations.

In

the

For the setup with ﬁve constraints, ECO is trained with
a ﬁxed initial Lagrange multiplier λi = 0.0 and a learn-
ing rate βi = 1e − 3, while IPO and P3O used the same
κ = 1.0 for each constraint. As shown in Fig. 9(a), we observed
that the episode lengths for ECO, IPO, and P3O with ﬁve
constraints are signiﬁcantly reduced compared to ECO with
only two constraints. Fig. 9(e) shows that P3O and IPO fail to
converge on the foot velocity contact constraint, while ECO
demonstrates better constraint satisfaction. Fig. 9(f) shows that
all algorithms fail to converge on the self-collision cost. This
is possibly due to predicting self-collision from the current
privileged observation space is challenging.
of
four-constraint

ECO (without
self-collision), we observe moderately better satisfaction
of the energy constraint compared to the ﬁve-constraint case.
Further removing the foot contact velocity constraint (three
constraints setting) led to even longer episode lengths than
the four-constraint setting, although performance remained
below that of the original two-constraint conﬁguration. Given
the empirical results and our previous observation of the
one-constraint
symmetric
the
reference motion constraint
led to unnatural walking
behaviors, as demonstrated in the accompanying video—we
conﬁguration (energy
conclude
consumption and symmetry constraints) is the most suitable
for
stable
humanoid walking in our
task. Further discussion and
rationale are provided in Sec. VII-A.

energy-eﬃcient

setting—where

two-constraint

consistently

achieving

omitting

setting

that

and

the

VI. EXPERIMENTS

A. Real World Results

To verify the improvement in energy eﬃciency, we deploy
the learned policy from ECO, along with the two baseline

Fig. 8. Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis. The mean energy cost
(a), Lagrange multiplier λ1 (b), and normalized episode length (c) of ECO
with the energy constraint b1 = 60J, evaluated across diﬀerent learning rates
for λ1 (β1 = 0.001, 0.01, 0.1) during training. Results averaged over 10 random
seeds.

consuming approximately 100J of energy with the target
walking velocity as 0.1m/s. Based on this, we conduct a linear
search over energy thresholds of 20J, 40J, 60J, 80J, and 100J
to identify the minimum threshold that enables the policy
to achieve similar normalized episode length within 1500
iterations, as shown in Fig. 7. The 60J threshold provides
the best trade-oﬀ between energy eﬃciency and locomotion
stability. This approach is eﬀective as it leverages physically
meaningful thresholds while supporting parallel evaluation. A
ﬁner-grained search (e.g., with 10J increments) can discover
policies with even lower energy consumption (e.g., 50J) that
still maintain stability. If further energy reduction is required,
smaller step sizes enable ﬁner control at the cost of additional
computation.

5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: To demonstrate
that the proposed ECO framework requires less human eﬀort
in hyperparameter tuning, we conduct a sensitivity analysis by
training ECO on a 0.1m/s linear velocity tracking task with
an energy threshold of b1 = 60J. We ﬁx the initial value
of the Lagrange multiplier at 0 and vary the learning rate
(β1 = 0.001, 0.01, 0.1). As shown in Fig. 8(a), which illustrates
the mean energy cost over iterations, all three learning rates
converge to a similar energy cost of approximately 60J after
an initial period of ﬂuctuation. This pattern suggests that
our Lagrangian approach ensures eﬀective energy convergence
across diﬀerent learning rates. Fig. 8(b) shows the evolution
of the Lagrange multiplier over iterations for diﬀerent learning
rates. A smaller learning rate causes the Lagrange multiplier to
change more slowly, resulting in higher energy consumption
initially due to constraint violations As energy increases, the
multiplier gradually rises, enabling faster convergence to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Training performance with more constraints settings. Comparison of training metrics for ECO, P3O, and IPO. The thresholds for energy consumption,
mirror reference motion, foot clearance, foot contact velocity, and self-collision are set at 60J, 0.05, 3.6, -528, and 0.048, respectively, as indicated by the
black dashed lines in (b)-(f). Results averaged over 10 random seeds.

Fig. 11. Screenshots of the sim-to-real transfer. BRUCE successfully
rejects disturbance and traverses outdoor terrains which can be seen in the
accompanying video.

consumption, we select three sets of data with similar, though
not identical, speeds from multiple experiments using diﬀerent
methods. As shown in Fig. 10(a), ECO consistently main-
tains motor power near or below the energy cost threshold
2.5W(60J/24s)—approximately 6 times lower than MPC and
2.3 times lower than PPO according to the cumulative energy
graph. Moreover, with the learned policy from ECO, BRUCE
successfully rejects disturbances and traverses diﬀerent
outdoor terrains as illustrated in Fig. 11. The full hardware
demonstration clips including comparisons with baselines,
disturbance rejection, and outdoor walking can be seen in the
accompanying video.

Fig. 10. Motor energy consumption and body height oscillation in the
real world. Single-run deployment curves are shown for visual clarity. The
relative body height is deﬁned as the oﬀset from the setpoint of the body
height. The inset plot in (a) is the cumulative motor energy.

methods, on the real robot hardware BRUCE for comparison.
includ-
Statistical results across multiple experiment runs,
the
ing the linear velocity along the x direction (speed),
total motor power (energy), and the body height
in the
world frame, are reported in Tab. V. Due to the sim-to-
real gap, velocity tracking on the hardware is less accurate
than in simulation. To ensure a fair comparison of energy

B. Emergent Behaviors

Empirical studies indicate that straight knee and heel-to-toe
walking enhance energy eﬃciency in humans and humanoid
robots [23], [62]. Instead of manually designing these behav-
iors for eﬃcient
locomotion, ECO shows that minimizing
energy consumption can generate similar behaviors without

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4873

humanoid robots. This ineﬃciency arises because reward
scales do not correspond linearly to physical quantities,
demanding a delicate balance between meeting energy require-
ments, following task commands, and maintaining motion
stability. In contrast, constrained RL explores a space deﬁned
by explicit constraints, many of which have direct physical
signiﬁcance, such as energy consumption limits and joint
restrictions. This makes tuning constraints more straightfor-
ward and eﬀective compared to adjusting reward or loss
weights.

In this work, we try to incorporate self-collision, foot
contact velocity, and foot clearance as additional constraints.
Although such constraints have been successfully applied
to quadruped robots [15], [47], we ﬁnd it challenging to
transfer these approaches directly to humanoids. This diﬃculty
arises not only from technical challenges associated with the
heterogeneity of constraint signals but also from diﬀerences
in morphology and balance dynamics. First, the cost terms
associated with diﬀerent constraints often diﬀer in magnitude,
which can lead to imbalanced gradient updates when training
the multi-head cost critic [15]. As a result, costs with smaller
magnitudes—such as the self-collision cost in Fig. 9(f)—tend
to converge more slowly. This issue could be mitigated by
applying appropriate normalization techniques [63] to rescale
cost signals to comparable magnitudes. Second, accurately
predicting diﬀerent types of costs may require heterogeneous
information. For instance,
inferring self-collision from the
current privileged observation (i.e., joint angles and base-link
kinematics) is particularly challenging, as it requires the net-
work to implicitly reconstruct the geometry of the body in the
world frame from joint-centric data. This suggests that a richer
observation space—including world-frame information—or a
specialized cost critic for self-collision may be necessary to
improve both prediction accuracy and constraint satisfaction.
Furthermore, humanoid robots have much smaller support
polygons than quadruped robots, especially in the single-
support phase, where the support region further shrinks. This
renders the space of feasible trajectories much smaller than
quadruped robots. In this case, imposing a large amount of
feasibility constraints in constrained RL may complex the
search space. We believe further study is required to handle
a larger number of constraints in humanoid locomotion. For
instance, incorporating model-based prior knowledge to reﬁne
the search space—such as using nullspace projections to
prioritize control tasks, as commonly done in the control com-
munity [64]—could help in selecting appropriate constraints
and mitigating task conﬂicts. A comprehensive investigation
of such approaches is beyond the scope of this work and is
left for future research.

B. Optimization Method Selection

Our experiments show that among the four constrained RL
algorithms, PPO-Lag is the most eﬀective. CRPO, as a primal
algorithm, does not introduce additional dual variables for
optimization and involves fewer hyperparameters, making it
theoretically simpler and easier to implement compared to
primal-dual methods. However, it lacks the smooth transition
between reward and constraint optimization objectives that

Fig. 12. Comparison of left knee joint angle and torque between diﬀerent
methods in the real world. We present single-run deployment curves for
visual clarity. A larger knee joint angle reﬂects a more ﬂexed knee during
walking, while a smaller knee joint torque at ground contact indicates a lighter
step.

explicit prescriptions, which also demonstrates that
bio-inspired behaviors are related to energy eﬃciency.

these

Fig. 12 illustrates the joint-level behaviors during walking.
Fig. 12(a) compares the left knee joint angle over time, where
ECO demonstrates a less ﬂexed knee compared to MPC
and PPO. In Fig. 12(b), the torque applied to the left knee
joint is compared. ECO consistently requires lower torque to
maintain stability and velocity tracking, resulting in reduced
energy expenditure during walking. Due to the lack of precise
the knee
force-torque sensors under the feet of BRUCE,
torques can also implicitly serve as a measure of the intensity
of ground contact as the knee exerts the most force in
humanoid locomotion. Additionally, we compare the body
oscillation over a 10s stable walking period. Fig. 10(b) shows
that BRUCE exhibits fewer oscillations with a lower frequency
and smaller magnitude when walking with the policy from
ECO, compared to MPC and PPO. The less body oscillation
and smaller knee torques suggest that improved energy eﬃ-
ciency also results in lighter steps and reduced stomping.

However, a heel-to-toe transition is not presented in the
resulting policy as shown in Fig. 11. We argue that the heel-
to-toe strategy, given the current hardware design of BRUCE,
demands additional control eﬀort to execute eﬀectively. Fur-
thermore, it requires a higher swing leg lift, which increases
energy consumption in the hip and knee motors.

VII. DISCUSSION

A. Rewards versus Constraints

In this study, we ﬁnd that tuning reward scales through
hyperparameter search within the RL framework (PPO) is
an ineﬃcient approach to reducing energy consumption in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

i

primal-dual methods oﬀer, making it diﬃcult to achieve stable
convergence in humanoid robots. P3O uses clamping functions
on constraints to apply a linear cost gradient penalty until
the constraints are met. However, this linear penalty makes
balancing multiple constraints diﬃcult, as each constraint
has distinct physical signiﬁcance and magnitude, requiring
. Small coeﬃcients lead to slow
separate coeﬃcients κP3O
convergence, while large ones make the system overly con-
servative. IPO, as a method that theoretically also employs
penalty functions, exhibits performance similar to P3O in our
experiments. It also requires careful tuning of the coeﬃcient
κIPO
i

to balance constraints eﬀectively.

In contrast, ECO leverages PPO-Lag to update both the
Lagrange multipliers and the policy, allowing the Lagrange
multipliers and their learning rates to adapt to the magnitude
of each constraint. By utilizing the Adam optimizer to update
these multipliers and learning rates, ECO eﬀectively adapts to
each constraint while smoothly transitioning the optimization
objective between rewards and constraints. As a result, ECO
achieves stable convergence in humanoid robots.

However, ECO faces challenges in optimizing the ﬁve
constraints considered in our study, highlighting the need for
improved optimization techniques in future work. Leveraging
the dynamics model of humanoid robots to improve the
convergence of constrained RL within a restricted feasible
region could be a promising direction [13], [65], [66].

C. Sim-to-Real Failure Cases

Our methods successfully transfer to the real world, and we
identify several key factors that critically aﬀect policy transfer:

leftmargin=1.5em
1) PD Gain Tuning: We ﬁnd that carefully tuning the
the
proportional
align
low-level
between
the
simulation and hardware. Otherwise, diﬀerences in
system dynamics can cause the policy to produce
divergent behaviors in the real world.

(Kp) and derivative (Kd) gains of
is

essential
performance

PD controller

joint-position

tracking

to

2) Compliant ankle strategy: We ﬁnd that high PD gains
at the ankle lead to instability upon ground contact due
to sensor noise. To address this, we reduce the ankle’s
PD gains, making the joints more compliant and the
policy less sensitive to noise. This simple adjustment
signiﬁcantly enhances robustness to terrain variations
and modeling errors in real-world tests.

3) Sensor Noise and Bias: Real sensors exhibit both
high-frequency noise (especially in joint-velocity mea-
surements) and low-frequency biases (e.g. Euler-angle
drift upon reset). To account for this, we inject noise
and random biases—matched in magnitude to hardware
measurements—into the corresponding state observa-
tions during domain randomization.

D. More Complex Settings

While our method is eﬀective for stable walking, applying
it to more complex scenarios, such as transitioning from ﬂat
surfaces to stairs, presents new challenges. For instance, a

lower foot lift is energy-eﬃcient on ﬂat surfaces, but stair
climbing requires higher foot lifts and precise planning to
navigate varying stair heights eﬃciently. One possible exten-
sion is to introduce mode-aware constraints [67], [68] that
adapt according to diﬀerent terrains and command types. For
example, energy constraints could be relaxed when stair climb-
ing is anticipated. A terrain classiﬁer or visual encoder [69],
[70], [71] could be used to identify terrain types, allowing the
policy to dynamically adjust constraint thresholds accordingly.
In addition, model-based planning [13], [72], [73] can be
incorporated, in which a high-level planner selects locomotion
modes based on the environment, while the low-level control
executes constrained locomotion policy conditioned on the
selected mode. This hierarchical approach aligns well with the
constrained RL framework, as constraints can be deﬁned and
enforced diﬀerently across modes. We consider this an exciting
future direction and plan to explore model-based extensions in
our follow-up work.

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we optimize the energy consumption for
humanoid walking through constrained RL by separating
energy consumption and reference motion objectives from the
reward function. We demonstrate that the ECO framework can
converge to a policy that achieves lower energy consumption
while maintaining robustness. Meanwhile, ECO is resilient
to hyperparameter settings, thereby eliminating the need for
extensive tuning on the weights of rewards. Extensive experi-
ments in both simulation and real-world hardware validate that
our approach can signiﬁcantly improve the energy eﬃciency
of humanoid walking without compromising robustness.

[1] Z. Wang et al., “Arm-constrained curriculum learning for

loco-

REFERENCES

[3]

manipulation of the wheel-legged robot,” 2024, arXiv:2403.16535.
[2] Z. He et al., “CDM-MPC: An integrated dynamic planning and control
framework for bipedal robots jumping,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.,
vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 6672–6679, Jul. 2024.
J. Zhang, J. Shen, Y. Liu, and D. Hong, “Design of a jumping control
framework with heuristic landing for bipedal robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2023, pp. 8502–8509.
[4] H. Liu et al., “PR2: A physics- and photo-realistic humanoid testbed
with pilot study in competition,” J. Field Robot., vol. 42, no. 7,
pp. 3545–3560, Oct. 2025.
P.-B. Wieber, R. Tedrake, and S. Kuindersma, “Modeling and control of
legged robots,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2016, pp. 1203–1234.

[5]

[6] Y. G. Alqaham, J. Cheng, and Z. Gan, “Energy-optimal asymmetrical
gait selection for quadrupedal robots,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 9,
no. 10, pp. 8386–8393, Oct. 2024.

[7] Z. Fu, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Minimizing energy con-
sumption leads to the emergence of gaits in legged robots,” 2021,
arXiv:2111.01674.

[8] Z. Fu, Q. Zhao, Q. Wu, G. Wetzstein, and C. Finn, “HumanPlus:
2024,

from humans,”

shadowing

imitation

and

Humanoid
arXiv:2406.10454.

[9] X. Gu, Y.-J. Wang, and J. Chen, “Humanoid-gym: Reinforcement
learning for humanoid robot with zero-shot Sim2Real transfer,” 2024,
arXiv:2404.05695.

[10] S. H. Jeon, S. Heim, C. Khazoom, and S. Kim, “Benchmarking potential
based rewards for learning humanoid locomotion,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2023, pp. 9204–9210.

[11] Y. Chow, M. Ghavamzadeh, L. Janson, and M. Pavone, “Risk-
learning with percentile risk criteria,”

constrained reinforcement
J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 167, pp. 1–51, 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

HUANG et al.: ECO: ENERGY-CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION WITH RL FOR HUMANOID WALKING

4875

[12] T. He, W. Zhao, and C. Liu, “Autocost: Evolving intrinsic cost for
zero-violation reinforcement learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
vol. 37, 2023, pp. 14847–14855.

[13] W. Huang, J. Ji, B. Zhang, C. Xia, and Y. Yang, “SafeDreamer: Safe

reinforcement learning with world models,” 2023, arXiv:2307.07176.

[14] J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel, “Constrained policy
optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Oct. 2017, pp. 22–31.
[15] Y. H. Kim et al., “Not only rewards but also constraints: Applications on
legged robot locomotion,” in Proc. IEEE Trans. Robot. (T-RO), vol. 40,
Jul. 2024, pp. 2984–3003.

[16] S. Collins, A. Ruina, R. Tedrake, and M. Wisse, “Eﬃcient bipedal
robots based on passive-dynamic Walkers,” Science, vol. 307, no. 5712,
pp. 1082–1085, Feb. 2005.

[17] R. Tedrake, T. W. Zhang, M.-F. Fong, and H. S. Seung, “Actuating a
simple 3D passive dynamic Walker,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., vol. 5, Sep. 2004, pp. 4656–4661.

[18] S. Kuindersma et al., “Optimization-based locomotion planning, esti-
mation, and control design for the atlas humanoid robot,” Auto. Robots,
vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 429–455, Mar. 2016.

[19] J. Shen, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, and D. Hong, “Implementation of a robust
dynamic walking controller on a miniature bipedal robot with proprio-
ceptive actuation,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS 21st Int. Conf. Humanoid Robots
(Humanoids), Nov. 2022, pp. 39–46.

[20] W. Xi, Y. Yesilevskiy, and C. D. Remy, “Selecting gaits for econom-
ical locomotion of legged robots,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 35, no. 9,
pp. 1140–1154, Aug. 2016.

[21] B. Ponton, M. Khadiv, A. Meduri, and L. Righetti, “Eﬃcient mul-
ticontact pattern generation with sequential convex approximations
the centroidal dynamics,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 37, no. 5,
of
pp. 1661–1679, Oct. 2021.

[22] J. Wang et al., “Online multicontact receding horizon planning via value
function approximation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 40, pp. 2791–2810,
2024.

[23] S. Fasano, J. Foster, S. Bertrand, C. DeBuys, and R. Griﬃn, “Eﬃcient,
dynamic locomotion through step placement with straight
legs and
rolling contacts,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May
2024, pp. 1143–1150.

[24] W. Cui et al., “Adapting humanoid locomotion over challenging terrain
via two-phase training,” in Proc. 8th Annu. Conf. Robot Learn., Jan.
2025, pp. 3439–3453.

[25] K. Li, G. Lai, and X. Yao, “Interactive evolutionary multiobjective
optimization via learning to rank,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 27,
no. 4, pp. 749–763, Aug. 2023.

[26] T. Darrell et al., “Humanoid locomotion as next token prediction,” in

Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 79307–79324.

[27] J. Siekmann, Y. Godse, A. Fern, and J. Hurst, “Sim-to-real learning of
all common bipedal gaits via periodic reward composition,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2021, pp. 7309–7315.
[28] A. Kumar, Z. Li, J. Zeng, D. Pathak, K. Sreenath, and J. Malik,
“Adapting rapid motor adaptation for bipedal robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Mali, Oct. 2022, pp. 1161–1168.
[29] H. J. Lee, S. Hong, and S. Kim, “Integrating model-based footstep
planning with model-free reinforcement learning for dynamic legged
locomotion,” 2024, arXiv:2408.02662.

[30] S. H. Bang, C. A. Jov´e, and L. Sentis, “RL-augmented MPC framework
for agile and robust bipedal footstep locomotion planning and control,”
2024, arXiv:2407.17683.

[31] W. Yu, G. Turk, and C. K. Liu, “Learning symmetric and low-energy
locomotion,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1–12, Aug. 2018.
[32] Z. Su et al., “Leveraging symmetry in RL-based legged locomotion
control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Oct.
2024, pp. 6899–6906.

[33] X. B. Peng, Y. Guo, L. Halper, S. Levine, and S. Fidler, “ASE: Large-
scale reusable adversarial skill embeddings for physically simulated
characters,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2022.

[34] X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and M. van de Panne, “DeepMimic:
Example-guided deep reinforcement learning of physics-based character
skills,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1–14, Aug. 2018.
[35] J. Xu, K. Li, and M. Abusara, “Preference based multi-objective rein-
forcement learning for multi-microgrid system optimization problem in
smart grid,” Memetic Comput., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 225–235, Jun. 2022.
[36] K. Li and H. Guo, “Human-in-the-loop policy optimization for
2024,

reinforcement

learning,”

preference-based multi-objective
arXiv:2401.02160.

[37] E. Altman, Constrained Markov Decision Processes: Stochastic Model-

ing. Evanston, IL, USA: Routledge, 1999.

[38] S. Li, K. Li, W. Li, and M. Yang, “Evolutionary alternating direc-
tion method of multipliers for constrained multiobjective optimization
with unknown constraints,” IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 1419–1433, Aug. 2025.

[39] S. Wang and K. Li, “Constrained Bayesian optimization under partial
observations: Balanced improvements and provable convergence,” in
Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 38, 2024, pp. 15607–15615.
[40] S. Paternain, L. F. O. Chamon, M. Calvo-Fullana, and A. Ribeiro,
learning has zero duality gap,” 2019,

“Constrained reinforcement
arXiv:1910.13393.

[41] A. Ray, J. Achiam, and D. Amodei, “Benchmarking batch deep rein-

forcement learning algorithms,” 2019, arXiv:1910.01708.

[42] P. Liu, D. Tateo, H. B. Ammar, and J. Peters, “Robot reinforcement
learning on the constraint manifold,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., 2021,
pp. 1357–1366.

[43] P. Kicki et al., “Fast kinodynamic planning on the constraint manifold
with deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 40, pp. 277–297,
2024.

[44] T. Xu, Y. Liang, and G. Lan, “CRPO: A new approach for safe
reinforcement learning with convergence guarantee,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2021, pp. 11480–11491.

[45] Y. Liu, J. Ding, and X. Liu, “IPO: Interior-point policy optimiza-
Intell., 2020,

tion under constraints,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
pp. 4940–4947.

[46] L. Zhang et al., “Penalized proximal policy optimization for safe

reinforcement learning,” 2022, arXiv:2205.11814.

[47] J. Lee, L. Schroth, V. Klemm, M. Bjelonic, A. Reske, and M. Hut-
ter, “Exploring constrained reinforcement
learning algorithms for
quadrupedal locomotion,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots
Syst. (IROS), Oct. 2024, pp. 11132–11138.

[48] J. Ji et al., “Safety gymnasium: A uniﬁed safe reinforcement learning
benchmark,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 36, Dec. 2023,
pp. 18964–18993.

[49] X. Gu et al., “Advancing humanoid locomotion: Mastering challenging
terrains with denoising world model learning,” 2024, arXiv:2408.14472.
[50] D. P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014,

arXiv:1412.6980.

[51] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,

“Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” 2017, arXiv:1707.06347.

[52] J. Schulman, P. Moritz, S. Levine, M. Jordan, and P. Abbeel, “High-
dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation,”
2015, arXiv:1506.02438.

[53] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk in
minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc.
Conf. Robot Learn., 2021, pp. 91–100.

[54] R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning,” Mach. Learn., vol. 8, nos. 3–4,
pp. 229–256, May 1992.

[55] Y. Liu, J. Shen, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Zhu, and D. Hong, “Design
and control of a miniature bipedal robot with proprioceptive actuation
for dynamic behaviors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May
2022, pp. 8547–8553.

[56] BRUCE, A Kid-Size Humanoid Robot Open-Platform for Research
and Education. Accessed: Aug. 30, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
www.westwoodrobotics.io/bruce/

[57] J. Liang, V. Makoviychuk, A. Handa, N. Chentanez, M. Macklin, and
D. Fox, “Gpu-accelerated robotic simulation for distributed reinforce-
ment learning,” in Proc. Conf. Robot Learn., Nov. 2018, pp. 270–282.
[58] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
learning,” 2017,

image-based robot

“Asymmetric actor critic for
arXiv:1710.06542.

[59] R. P. Singh, Z. Xie, P. Gergondet, and F. Kanehiro, “Learning bipedal
walking for humanoids with current feedback,” IEEE Access, vol. 11,
pp. 82013–82023, 2023.

[60] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “MuJoCo: A physics engine for
model-based control,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
Oct. 2012, pp. 5026–5033.

[61] N. Koenig and A. Howard, “Design and use paradigms for Gazebo, an
open-source multi-robot simulator,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst. (IROS), vol. 3, Oct. 2004, pp. 2149–2154.

[62] P. G. Adamczyk, S. H. Collins, and A. D. Kuo, “The advantages of
a rolling foot in human walking,” J. Experim. Biol., vol. 209, no. 20,
pp. 3953–3963, Oct. 2006.

[63] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap, “Mastering diverse

domains through world models,” 2023, arXiv:2301.04104.

[64] A. Dietrich, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Sch¨aﬀer, “An overview of null space
projections for redundant, torque-controlled robots,” Int. J. Robot. Res.,
vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 1385–1400, Sep. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

4876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

[65] J. Levy, T. Westenbroek, and D. Fridovich-Keil, “Learning to walk from
three minutes of real-world data with semi-structured dynamics models,”
2024, arXiv:2410.09163.

[66] Y. As, I. Usmanova, S. Curi, and A. Krause, “Constrained policy
optimization via Bayesian world models,” 2022, arXiv:2201.09802.
[67] J.-P. Sleiman, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Versatile multicontact
planning and control for legged loco-manipulation,” Sci. Robot., vol. 8,
no. 81, p. 5014, Aug. 2023.

[68] M. Zhang, Y. Ma, T. Miki, and M. Hutter, “Learning to open and traverse

doors with a legged manipulator,” 2024, arXiv:2409.04882.

[69] A. Agarwal, A. Kumar, J. Malik, and D. Pathak, “Legged locomotion
in challenging terrains using egocentric vision,” in Proc. Conf. Robot
Learn., 2022, pp. 403–415.

[70] E. Chane-Sane, J. Amigo, T. Flayols, L. Righetti, and N. Mansard,
“SoloParkour: Constrained reinforcement learning for visual locomotion
from privileged experience,” 2024, arXiv:2409.13678.

[71] W. Yu et al., “Visual-locomotion: Learning to walk on complex terrains
with vision,” in Proc. 5th Annu. Conf. Robot Learn., Nov. 2021,
pp. 1291–1302.

[72] N. Hansen, S. V. Jyothir, V. Sobal, Y. LeCun, X. Wang, and H. Su,
“Hierarchical world models as visual whole-body humanoid controllers,”
2024, arXiv:2405.18418.

[73] Y. Ma, F. Farshidian, T. Miki, J. Lee, and M. Hutter, “Combining
learning-based locomotion policy with model-based manipulation for
legged mobile manipulators,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 2377–2384, Apr. 2022.

Weidong Huang received the B.S. degree from
South China Normal University in 2021 and the
M.S. degree from Beihang University in 2024. He
is currently a Research Engineer with the State
Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(BIGAI). His research interests include robotics,
reinforcement learning, and model-based planning.

in 2015,

Jingwen Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering, Tsinghua University,
the M.S.
degree from the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering, Columbia University, in 2017, and the Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, University of California,
Los Angeles, in 2023. He is currently a Research
Scientist with the State Key Laboratory of General
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI). His research inter-

ests include robotics, optimal control, and motion planning.

Jiongye Li is currently pursuing the degree with
the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University.
He is an Intern with the State Key Laboratory of
General Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beijing Institute for
General Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BIGAI). His research
interests include humanoid robots, reinforcement
learning, and optimal control.

Shibowen Zhang received the B.E. degree in control
science and engineering from Tongji University,
Shanghai, China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with the School of Control Science
and Engineering, University of Science and Technol-
ogy of China (USTC). His research interests include
robotics and control.

Jiayang Wu is currently pursuing the bachelor’s
degree with the Department of Computer Science
and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
(HIT). He is an Intern Research Assistant with
Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(BIGAI). His research interests include robotics,
optimal control, and reinforcement learning.

Jiayi Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in robotics from The University of Edinburgh
in 2023. He is currently a Research Scientist with
Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(BIGAI). Before that, he was a Research Associate
with The University of Edinburgh in 2024. He was a
Research Intern with Italian Institute of Technology
in 2017. His research interests include humanoid
locomotion, multi-contact motion planning, rein-
forcement learning, and trajectory optimization.

Hangxin Liu (Member, IEEE) received the dual
B.S. degree in mechanical engineering and computer
science from Virginia Tech in 2016 and the M.S.
degree in mechanical engineering and the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from the University of
California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 2018 and 2021,
respectively. He is currently a Research Scientist
with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (BIGAI). His research interests include
robot perception, learning, human–robot interaction,
and cognitive robotics.

IEEE)

Yaodong Yang (Member,
received the
bachelor’s degree from the University of Science
and Technology of China, the M.Sc. degree from
Imperial College London, and the Ph.D. degree from
University College London (UCL). He is currently
an Assistant Professor with the Institute for AI,
Peking University. Before joining Peking Univer-
sity, he was an Assistant Professor with King’s
College London. He studies game theory,
rein-
forcement learning, and multi-agent systems, aiming
to achieve artiﬁcial general collective intelligence
through multi-agent reinforcement learning. He has maintained a track record
of more than sixty publications at top conferences (NeurIPS, ICML, and
ICLR) and top journals (Artiﬁcial Intelligence and National Science Review),
along with the Best System Paper Award at CoRL 2020 and the Best Blue-
Sky Paper Award at AAMAS 2021. He was nominated by UCL for the Joint
AAAI/ACM SIGAI Doctoral Dissertation Award. He was awarded the ACM
SIGAI China Rising Star and the World AI Conference (WAIC’22) Rising
Star.

Yao Su (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
from the School of Mechatronic Engineering, Harbin
Institute of Technology, in 2016, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering, University of Cali-
fornia, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 2017 and 2021,
respectively. He is currently a Research Scientist
with the State Key Laboratory of General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Beijing Institute for General Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (BIGAI). His research interests include
robotics, control, optimization, trajectory planning,
and mechatronics.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Queen's University. Downloaded on July 06,2026 at 16:50:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

